Tips on what to keep in a lab notebook copied from https://colinpurrington.com/tips/lab-notebooks

What should go into your notebook

1. Include detailed notes on all discussions and thoughts on your experimental goals. This means, of course, that you should start making dated entries immediately rather than waiting until you get your experiment(s) started. Because some information might come via e-mailed suggestions (from your mentor or colleagues) or from online sources (PDFs or web sites), you might paste “miniaturized” versions of relevant passages directly into your notebook rather than spending the time to transcribe. If it has a scrapbook feel, that’s what you want. Paste in some photographs, too.
1. Eventually, include detailed experimental protocols that could be easily followed by another researcher. If you have typed out a detailed protocol in a computer file, print it out (shrinking it to make it fit nicely) and glue it into your notebook (it is worthless if you file it elsewhere). Give each experiment a name so that you can refer to it quickly in subsequent entries. All experimental protocols should be accompanied with clearly-worded hypotheses and goals, and indicate exactly what measurements are going to be taken.
1. Provide full justification of all experimental details (species used, temperature, reagents, etc.). Justification might come as simple logic (stated, in your own words) or as references to other published research (e.g., voltages applied as per Frankenstein 1818, with full citation given).
1. Annotate all calculations so that all numbers, concentrations, etc. are fully explained and would be interpretable by another researcher. Remember to include units.
1. Give full details for all experimental organisms. Who provided seeds, plasmids, etc., and what information did they give you? Were seeds the result of open pollination, or were they from controlled crosses? If you bought organism yourself, give source, delivery conditions, etc. Include catalog numbers (e.g., Burpee LE-23001) when possible.
1. For greenhouse experiments, write down details of potting media (brand, type) and pot (shape, dimensions, color, brand). Also record when plants were watered, fertilized, repotted, or repositioned. If other people are asked to care for your plants, ask person to keep a detailed log of when plants were watered and fertilized.
1. Record reagent details. Details include vendor (name, address, phone number; in case you want to buy more in the future) and product information (brand, product number, chemical structure, purity grade, lot number, date of mixing/production, expiration date, etc.). Whenever water is used, specify deionized, distilled, tap, cold, hot, sterile, etc. Vast majority of these details might not affect your results but you never know.
1. Record equipment details (brand, model number, sensitivity). In some circumstances it is important to record serial number, just in case there was something unique about the item you used. For growth chambers, always record bulb type and wattage (and brand name).
1. Record field, greenhouse, laboratory, and growth chamber conditions such as temperature (in Celsius, ideally), humidity, barometric pressure, light levels, light/day cycle (hours of each, and when night starts), wind speed, wind direction, etc. Note that conditions sometimes change, so record these parameters often if variation is likely to affect your results.
1. Sometimes, personal information should be noted. If you are interested in observing behavior of wounded bulls, note whether you are wearing a red shirt. Similarly, behavior of mosquitoes might be changed if you smell bad or use Axe Body Spray (you shouldn’t). Strange details like this can be important down the road. These personal details are also important if you are conducting psychology research — what you are wearing and whether you’re attractive can strongly influence the behaviors of your test volunteers.
1. Record names of people providing assistance with data collection, techniques, statistical advice, equipment loans, stipend support, supplies funds. Write this information down immediately so that you remember to include it in your future acknowledgements sections when you publish your research. Keep notes about phone conversations and e-mail interactions.
1. Make quick drawings of experiment set-ups, location of experiment in laboratory or greenhouse, etc. For field experiments, include a sketch of where field site is situated. These sketches do not have to be works of art.
1. Attach photographs that document key experimental details.
1. On the day you first enter data into a statistical program, write down the file name and where the file is stored (e.g., DVD on shelf in room 101; backup on laboratory computer in “Backup folder”). Give your file an informative name (e.g., “heat-exp1-2019-01-11.dat”) rather than “experiment1.dat” or “stats_hell.dat.”
1. Make daily entries, even if to say just “Checked for mortality in Heat Exp 1; no mortality yet. They certainly look miserable, though.”
1. Specify purpose for each entry, and reference an experiment name. If you just wrote, “Censused” for a particular date, you wouldn’t have a record of which experiment you censused or what specific data you were collecting.
1. If you happen to record some data directly onto datasheets (e.g., Excel spreadsheets that exist on computers or within ring binders), include dated entries for all such occasions: “entered data onto heat-exp1-2019-01-11.dat spreadsheet.” Ideally, construct your spreadsheets so that you can paste them into your notebook, perhaps right after your experimental details are explained (you can flag the page so that you can easily find it when adding more data to empty cells).
1. Detail all mistakes, problems with procedures, and lapses in data collection so that you can fully explain “odd” results at the end of your experiment. E.g., “I dropped seed #455 but found it on floor.”
1. Use military time for all time entries (e.g., 1420 hrs). Or at least append AM/PM to all your times.
1. All entries should be un-obscured by attached graphs, data sheets, photographs, etc. I.e., when you take a photograph of a page there shouldn’t be important information underneath attached items.
1. When you include datasheets, photographs, graphs, product labels, etc., use staple to cleanly and permanently attach ONE edge. The reasoning (thanks, Dr R. Whitmarsh) is that if you ever have patent-related scrutiny of your notebook, you don’t want it to appear that you might have hidden something underneath the attached paper. If your attachment itself has something on the back, it’s best to make a copy of the underside and attach this copy so it is visible. This might seem fussy but doing so makes it easier to make a digital scan. If you’re Type A, it’s a good habit to write near the attachment (or underneath it) what it is; if the attachment falls out or is stolen, you know what you’re missing. Avoid tape (it becomes brittle and yellow) and glue (it usually fails unless of archival quality).
1. Avoid making entries that are wholly unrelated to your project (e.g., “Don’t forget to mail fruitcakes”).
1. Include the full names and contact information for all collaborators (in courses, this translates to “laboratory partners”). You will sometimes have, “see X’s notebook for further info,” and these entries will only be useful to other researchers if there is good contact information at the start of a particular experiment.
1. At the conclusion of your experiment, or at the end of your course, write or print out a full directory of all electronic files that relate to your experiment. Staple into notebook.
1. Describe the locations of all computer media, data binders, seeds, samples, etc., so that items can be located by others in the future. This information is best in tabular form (perhaps as an Excel or Word table printed and glued into your notebook). All seeds, DNA samples, etc. should be fully labeled with your name and date so that it is clear which notebook should be checked to learn more about the history of the sample.
1. Typically, the laboratory notebook should stay in the laboratory where the experiments were conducted (i.e., with your mentor or employer). If you can’t part with it, make yourself a copy.
1. Digital cameras with wifi (or Eye-Fi cards) are really cheap, so if you do expensive, important science I recommend that you have one camera per project. Equip each camera with a clear label (e.g., “Purrington”). At the end of each work day the researcher should take a photograph of each page. Images are then automatically beamed to cloud. Then when your experiment destroys the laboratory in big mushroom cloud, you still have a copy of everything and can repeat it. Also, when your trusted lab technician steals are your notebooks (like this person), you’ll have a backup. An additional benefit is that Principal Investigators can log into server on their iPhones to see laboratory activities even while sipping cocktails on the beach.
