
1. Create a directory for the files (mkdir), use the naming scheme type_of_sequencer_year_month_day_SEQ##: hiseq_2014_08_07_SEQ04
    - EXAMPLE: 
    
    `mkdir /local/shared/pinsky_lab/sequencing/hiseq_2016_10_25_SEQ17`
    
    - Change the group permission on the newly made folder so that other people can write to it:
    `chgrp -R pinsky_lab hiseq_2016_10_25_SEQ17`
    
2. Enter the newly made directory
    
    `cd hiseq_2016_10_25_SEQ17`
    
3. Retrieve files from the sequencer - 10/25/2016 - can't access the data because Princeton doesn't recognize Michelle's credentials, only Malin can get in.
    - UPDATED 10-25-2016 Princeton now emails a link to the data (you must sign in with credentials)
    i. Click the link
    ii. Click on the sequencing run of interest in the box on the left that says “Recently Entered Samples"
    iii. In the box titled Sample Provenance, click on the link following "This library was utilized within the following output(s):” - repeat for each lane
    iv. In the “Data and Statistics” box, in the bottom right corner is a green button that says “Batch Download Data Files"
    v. Click checkmarks next to the #_read_1_passed_filter.fastq.gz and #_read_2_passed_filter.fastq.gz
    vi. Click “Prepare selected files for download” and copy the link
    vii. In amphiprion, in the directory you made in the previous step, paste the link
    - Repeat for all lanes
    - Count raw reads (optional)
    
    `zcat clownfish-ddradseq-seq08-for-231-cycles-h3mgvbcxx_1_read_1_passed_filter.fastq.gz | wc -l | awk '{print$1/4}'`
    - If you like you can count the number of reads that begin with your barcodes
    
    `zcat clownfish-ddradseq-seq08-for-231-cycles-h3mgvbcxx_1_read_1_passed_filter.fastq.gz | awk ‘^ACGTTT' | wc -l`
    - alternative command line
    
    `zcat XXXXX.fastq.gz | grep -c "^AAACGA"`
4. Update where files are saved on amphiprion in the sequencing table of the sql database, enter data by hand
5. Make a working directory 
    - make separate pool directories to keep the process radtags output separate
    
    `mkdir /local/home/michelles/02-apcl-ddocent/17seq`
    
    
    `cd 17seq`
    
    
    `mkdir bcsplit Pool1 Pool2 Pool3 Pool4 logs scripts samples`
   
    `cd bcsplit`
    
    `mkdir lane1 lane2`
6. Create an index file in R using the script [create_index.R](https://github.com/stuartmichelle/Genetics/blob/master/code/create_index.R).  Upload the resulting file to amphiprion into the logs directory.
7. Create a names file in R using the script [create_names.R](https://github.com/stuartmichelle/Genetics/blob/master/code/create_names.R).  Upload the resulting files to amphiprion into the logs directory.
8. Copy barcodes file in your logs directory from the logs directory of the last sequencing run only if you used the same barcodes, don't include barcodes you didn't use.

[Return to analysis protocol](./0.hiseq_ddocent.md)
