Files get filtered for:

- SNPS genotyped in % individuals (g)
- minor allele count (mac)
- minimum mean depth (dp)
- individuals that did not seq well (lm)
- minor allele frequency (maf)
- HWE
- define indels (prim)
- Remove indels (SNP)

Work in the directory where SNPs were called.

To start, keep variants that have been successfully genotyped in 50% of individuals, have a minimum quality score of 30, and a minor allele count of 3.  This will get rid of a lot of data and make the next filtering steps run faster. Takes about 1 hour to run.

`vcftools --vcf TotalRawSNPs.vcf --geno 0.5 --mac 3 --minQ 30 --recode --recode-INFO-all --out raw.g5mac3`

 Those two simple filters got rid of 50% of the data and will make the next filtering steps run much faster. The next filter is a minimum depth for a genotype call.  This filter examines the value in the DP column for each genotype and marks any genotype with a value less than 3 as "missing".
 
 
-  $ vcftools --vcf raw.g5mac3.recode.vcf --minDP 3 --recode --recode-INFO-all --out raw.g5mac3dp3
-  This command will recode genotypes that have less than 3 reads. Sophisticated multisample variant callers like FreeBayes and GATK can confidently call genotypes with few reads because variants are assessed across all samples simultaneously. So, the genotype is based on three reads AND prior information from all reads from all individuals. This is not supposed to remove any sites, it only changes the genotypes with less than 3 reads to “missing”.
- (FilterTut Step 12) Get rid of individuals that did not sequence well -
    - $ filter_missing_ind.sh raw.g5mac3dp3.recode.vcf  raw.g5mac3dp3lm
    - Look at histogram and decide on a cutoff - replace X with this in your output file name
    - Here we chose .5 - best to say yes and type in the calculated cutoff (rounded)

   
   
- (FilterTut 13) Now that we have removed poor coverage individuals, we can restrict the data to variants called in a high percentage of individuals and filter by mean depth of genotypes - for parentage, use an maf of 0.2
-  $ vcftools --vcf raw.g5mac3dplm.recode.vcf --geno 0.95 --maf 0.05 --recode --recode-INFO-all --out DP3g95maf05 --min-meanDP 20
- (FilterTut 20) In order to get at population specific SNP calls, run this script pop_missing_filter.sh

    - pop_missing_filter.sh DP3g95maf05.recode.vcf popmap .1 1 DP3g95p5maf05

        - Usage is pop_missing_filter vcffile popmap percent_missing_per_pop number_of_pops_for_cutoff name_for_output
- (FilterTut 44) Begin filtering with FreeBayes designed output - run script dDocent filters
    - $ dDocent_filters DP3g95p5maf05.recode.vcf DP3g95p5maf05
    - Is this from a mixture of SE and PE libraries? Enter yes or no.
no
   
   
If distrubtion looks normal, a 1.645 sigma cutoff (~90% of the data) would be 18.9923411111
The 95% cutoff would be 17
Would you like to use a different maximum mean depth cutoff than 17, yes or no
no

- (FilterTut 46) Apply the HWE filter by population
    - $ filter_hwe_by_pop.pl -v DP3g95p5maf05.FIL.FIL.recode.vcf -p popmap -o DP3g95p5maf05.HWE

        - the example in FilterTut uses an unusually high -h value
        - default h = 0.001
- (FilterTut 48) Convert file to SNPs only and indicate SNP and INDELs
    - $ vcfallelicprimitives DP3g95p5maf05.HWE.recode.vcf --keep-info --keep-geno > DP3g95p5maf05.HWE.prim.vcf
- Remove INDELs
    - $ vcftools --vcf DP3g95p5maf05.HWE.prim.vcf --remove-indels --recode --recode-INFO-all --out SNP.DP3g95p5maf05.HWE
- $ ErrorCount.sh SNP.DP3g95p5maf05.HWE.recode.vcf

    - The total SCORCHED EARTH error rate is 0.0328467286247.
- convert to genepop
    - michelles 2016-02-29 11:57:20 filtering_25-01-2016 $ vcf2genepop.pl vcf=SNP.DP10g95maf2.HWE.recode.vcf.recode.vcf > DP10g95maf2.genepop

- [ ] fetch gene pop file

- [ ] add ‘pop’ to 3rd line of gene pop file

- [ ] rosetta stone samples in R - amended R script to handle any number of columns, previously was set to 2621, changed to ncol(largedf)-1

- [ ] remove regenotyped samples in R -

    - [ ] have to run the regenotype script,

    - [ ] then evaluate the csv by determining which to keep, (used the conservative logic that even if there were fewer loci, if there was no labeling error it was better to keep)

    - [ ] then run evaluated script.

- [ ] remove recaptured samples

- [ ] run through cervus

Rad haplotyper isn’t working properly

- Rad haplotyper takes a lot of memory, be careful with how many threads you use, maybe don’t use more than 5 -  rad_haplotyper.pl -v SNP.DP3g95p5maf05.HWE.recode.vcf -x 5 -mp 1 -u 20 -ml 4 -n -r /local/home/jonp/test2/reference.fasta -p /local/home/jonp/test2/popmap -g seq3_5
- $ grep FILTERED stats.out | mawk '!/Complex/' | cut -f1 > loci.to.remove
- $ remove.bad.hap.loci.sh loci.to.remove SNP.DP3g95p5maf05.HWE.recode.vcf
- how many snps are left?
    - mawk '!/#/' SNP.DP3g95p5maf05.HWE.filtered.vcf | wc -l - 587
- $ rad_haplotyper.pl -v SNP.DP3g95p5maf05.HWE.filtered.vcf -x 10 -r /local/home/jonp/test2/reference.fasta -p /local/home/jonp/test2/popmap -g seq3_5

- -v = vcf input file
-x = # of threads
-mp = max paralog inds
-u = cutoff - remove loci with more than this # of SNPS
-ml = max low cov inds
-n = indells

- -r = reference.fasta
-p = location of popmap
-g = name of output gene pop file (have to specify p if using this)

[Return to analysis protocol](./0.hiseq_ddocent.md)
